Tonight, the crisis in Ukraine nears a breaking point.
President Biden says the United States
believes Vladimir Putin has made the decision to invade Ukraine.
As of this moment, I'm convinced he's made the decision.
We have reason to believe that.
The president says Russia intends
to target Ukraine's capital city of Kiev
within the next few days.
Russia increases its number of troops to as many as 190,000
surrounding Ukraine's border.
Reports of possible false flag operations underway,
while increased shelling continues in eastern Ukraine
for the second straight day.
And the latest diplomatic efforts
to de-escalate tensions.
Two years in prison, former officer Kim Potter
sentenced in the shooting death of Daunte Wright.
His mother's emotional plea for justice.
I'll never be able to forgive you
for what you've stolen from us.
Health care workers and fatigue, despite falling COVID cases,
hospitals remain overwhelmed and understaffed.
We go inside a COVID ICU.
Olympic doping scandal fallout, will it
lead to drastic changes in women's figure skating?
Winter storm mess, near whiteout conditions
results in a 100 vehicle pileup in Illinois.
And on the road to a Florida school
with an unlikely visitor.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is this CBS Evening News with Norah O'Donnell.
Good evening to our viewers in the West.
And thank you for joining us.
I'm Jericka Duncan, in for Norah.
Strong words tonight from President Biden.
He says he believes the decision for war
has already been made by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The president warning the nation that Ukraine's capital of Kiev
made up of more than 2.8 million people
could be a target within days.
This is the biggest crisis to face Europe
since the end of the Cold War.
The latest satellite images show Russian troops
moving within 10 miles of Ukraine's border
where they've deployed helicopter and ground attack
aircraft.
Meanwhile, Russian-backed separatists
have announced the evacuation of hundreds of thousands
of residents to Russia from a region in eastern Ukraine.
Russian media is also reporting attacks in the region
that the US and Ukraine say are staged false flag attacks.
Russia has increased its number of troops to the border
to as many as 190,000.
We have a lot of news to get to tonight with this fast moving
story.
But first, we go to CBS's Weijia Jiang at the White House,
where the president made that extraordinary announcement.
Good evening, Weijia.
Good evening, Jericka.
For weeks now, President Biden has
said the US was not positive that Vladimir Putin had
decided to invade Ukraine.
Will that all change today as he warned?
It would likely happen in the coming days.
The president vowed to implement punishing sanctions
to make Russia pay the price.
But he also said Putin still had time to change his mind.
For the first time, President Biden
left no room for doubt over whether he
believes Vladimir Putin will launch an invasion of Ukraine.
You are convinced that President Putin
is going to invade Ukraine.
Is that what you just said a few months ago?
Yes, I do.
Yes.
So is diplomacy off the table then?
No.
There's all-- until he does, diplomacy
is always a possibility.
The president revealed his assessment
after holding a phone call with NATO allies
amid the administration's all-out effort
to prevent a war.
He said there was reason to believe Russia would
invade in the coming days.
We're doing everything in our power
to remove any reason that Russia may
give to justify invading Ukraine and prevent them from moving.
Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Vice President
Kamala Harris are meeting with allies at a security
conference in Munich.
She is scheduled to see Ukrainian president Volodymyr
Zelensky on Saturday.
But some US officials worry him leaving Ukraine would
give Moscow a window to act.
Tonight, the White House is also blaming
Russia for those cyber attacks in Ukraine
that we saw this week against the defense
ministry and major banks.
National security officials say they do not have intelligence
to indicate Russia is coming after the US next.
But they are working with the private sector
to secure systems just in case.
Jericka.
Weijia Jiang at the White House getting the president
to clarify how seriously concerned
he is about an invasion.
Thank you.
Now to Ukraine where in the eastern part of the country,
there have been reports of explosions
along with air raid sirens.
CBS's Charlie D'Agata is in the city of Kiev
with the very latest.
Good evening, Charlie.
Good evening, Jericka.
There has been a dramatic rise in tensions here in the last 48
hours due largely to those developments in the east,
exactly the kind of move the US and NATO allies
have feared Moscow might use as a pretext to invade.
Women, children, and the elderly packed
onto buses in Eastern Ukraine tonight,
part of a massive evacuation of citizens headed to Russia,
they were told for their own safety.
Sirens blared with Russian backed rebels
who control the region, warning that Ukrainian forces are
about to attack.
Also circulated today, video of what's left of a jeep, rebels
say blew up outside their headquarters in Donetsk.
The region is not only controlled
by Russian-backed separatists but so
are the images and information that come out of it.
Russian media tonight also showed
this video described as an explosion affecting a pipeline
in a rebel-held city.
Ukrainian ministry of defense flatly
denied claims they're planning aggressions
and warned against false flag operations
meant to trigger a war.
Today's events follow a dramatic escalation
in hostilities between Ukrainian government forces
and Russian separatists in the east,
including shelling that tore through the walls
of a kindergarten in Ukraine yesterday.
President Vladimir Putin blamed Ukraine for the deteriorating
security situation.
And ratcheting tensions even higher,
Moscow's plans to hold nuclear exercises on Saturday
to test ballistic and cruise missiles that President Putin
himself will personally supervise.
US officials now say Russia has amassed
as many as 190,000 troops near the border of Ukraine,
an increase from around 100,000 at the end of January,
edging even closer and awaiting further orders.
Now those military exercises to one side,
the real concern here this weekend
would be whether we see further escalations in eastern Ukraine
and what that potential flashpoint may bring.
Jericka.
Charlie, thank you.
Let's turn now to CBS's chief foreign affairs
correspondent and moderator of Face the Nation Margaret
Brennan.
Margaret, you've been covering this for weeks now.
It's clear that things have escalated.
What are some of the broader implications here?
Well, the US, Jericka, is concerned
that other autocratic countries like China
may take a page out of Vladimir Putin's playbook.
And the president said this would be
a catastrophic war of choice.
And it goes beyond Ukraine.
As he describes it, he believes Vladimir Putin
wants to reshape Europe and the global power alliance that has
existed for the past 77 years.
And in many ways, this is personal for President Biden.
It was on his watch back in 2014 when he was vice president
that he ran Ukraine policy.
And that's when Vladimir Putin annexed Crimea,
part of southern Ukraine, and fed the fighting
in the east of the country.
And he didn't pay a large price for that.
So the concern now is Vladimir Putin may not stop there.
What happens next will definitely
impact the global economy.
It could potentially create millions of refugees,
and it could possibly cost thousands of lives.
Wow, very, very disturbing.
Margaret Brennan for us, thank you.
It was sentencing day for former Minnesota police officer
found guilty of manslaughter in the shooting death
of 20-year-old Daunte Wright.
David Schuman from our Minneapolis station WCCO
was inside the courthouse.
I have to live in this nightmare, watching my son shot
and killed over and over again.
Through tears, Katie Wright pleaded for the former police
officer Kim Potter to get the maximum sentence
for killing her son.
She never once said his name.
And for that, I'll never be able to forgive you.
Potter, who had been on the force for 26 years,
was convicted of first-degree manslaughter
two days before Christmas.
Potter says she meant to tase Wright during a traffic stop
last April.
I just shot him.
I grabbed the wrong [BLEEP] gun!
[BLEEP]
But pulled her gun instead, shooting Wright once
in the chest.
When her time to speak came, a tearful Potter
looked directly at Wright's mother.
I understand the mother's love, and I'm
sorry I broke your heart.
Officer Potter made a mistake that ended tragically.
In the end, Judge Regina Chu, her voice cracking,
said Potter would serve 24 months,
a quarter of what she faced.
She never intended to hurt anyone.
Wright's family disappointed with the sentence.
This lady got a slap on the wrist.
And we still every night sitting around crying, waiting
for my son to come home.
Under Minnesota law, Potter will only
have to serve 2/3 of her sentence
in prison, 16 months, which means
she could be released almost exactly two years
after Daunte Wright's death.
Jericka.
David Schuman for us, thank you.
Tonight, the entire family of America's top doctor
is fighting COVID.
Surgeon General Vivek Murthy revealed
his four-year-old daughter's diagnosis a few days ago.
Well, now, Murthy, his wife, and five-year-old son
have all tested positive.
We turn now to the hidden toll of the two-year pandemic
on exhausted health care workers.
Here's CBS's Kris Van Cleave.
Those are all COVID patient rooms.
Nurse Courtney Hollingsworth takes us
inside the COVID surg unit at St. Claire Regional Medical
Center in rural Morehead, Kentucky.
Some of these people are very, very sick.
Hollingsworth estimates about 40% of the nursing staff
here has left during the pandemic.
Burnout and what she calls compassion fatigue
are now just part of the job.
We're reminding ourselves why we went in to nursing,
where we make a difference.
The hospital says about 90% of COVID patients who
end up here are unvaccinated.
The staff says much of this community
seems to have moved on from the pandemic
while its life and death consequences play out
inside the hospital walls around the clock.
The only thing that is semi-comparable and not even
close is like a battlefield.
And we've been fighting now for two years.
But we're the only people left to fight.
Do you think about walking away?
It wouldn't be the appropriate thing to do.
I feel like I would be abandoning
my friends, my family.
Aaron Parker banks has been the only doctor on that battlefield
at this family clinic in Owingsville, 50 miles east
of Lexington.
At any moment, if I start thinking about it, I cry.
One of my mentors growing up, who was like a mom to me,
she lost her battle.
There's not even words that can describe what all we've seen
over the last year and a half.
He says finding those words and his own time to heal
will have to wait for now.
Kris Van Cleave, CBS News, Owingsville, Kentucky.
Now to some other stories making headlines,
that widespread winter storm of snow and ice
along with multiple tornadoes have left a trail of damage,
including this more than 100 vehicle pileup in Illinois.
Several tractor trailers skidded off the road
during whiteout conditions.
No one was seriously hurt.
And there were multiple reports of tornadoes in Alabama.
One damaged several homes, including this one, where
a tree sliced right through it.
Meanwhile, in Canada today, police
moved in to confront protesters, who for three weeks,
have gridlocked the capital city of Ottawa
over vaccine mandates.
Semi-trucks and other vehicles were towed.
At least 70 people so far have been arrested.
And there's new data tonight on child poverty in this country.
The number of children living in poverty rose from 3.7 million
since the child tax credit expired at the end of December.
That's an increase of 41% according to a study
by Columbia University.
A quarter of Black and Latino children now live in poverty.
That's more than double that of white children.
Well, turning now to the Olympics
where the fallout continues, following the stunning end
to the women's figure skating final.
from Beijing, here's CBS's Jamie Yuccas.
Kamila Valieva was welcomed home to Russia today, just hours
after her disastrous performance in the skating finals.
That's the most mistakes that we've ever seen Kamila make.
Valieva's fall from grace prompted the strongest response
yet from IOC President Thomas Bach.
I was very, very disturbed.
Bach says he was especially concerned
when he saw her coach scold her saying, why did you let it go?
Why did you stop fighting?
When I afterwards saw how she was received by her closest
entourage with what appeared to be a tremendous coldness,
it was chilling.
Valieva tested positive for a banned heart medication
in December.
But she was cleared to compete in part because she's a minor.
How important is it to start looking at those people
within her inner circle?
It's of extreme importance.
Doping very rarely happens alone by the athletes.
Valieva's case has renewed attention
on Russia's Olympic ban for state-sponsored doping,
which is set to expire this year.
And it's rekindled debate among several governing
bodies over raising the minimum age to compete.
We will initiate such a discussion
and at least give them some food for thought.
As a side note, Elana Meyers Taylor
will be the American flag bearer in this weekend's closing
ceremony.
She had to skip that honor, you may
remember, in the opening ceremony
after she tested positive for COVID.
It will take place after she goes for gold in this weekend's
two-woman bobsled.
Jericka.
Let's hope she wins.
Jamie Yuccas, thank you.
Still ahead on tonight's CBS Evening News,
powerful winds cause harrowing landings
at a major international airport.
And avocados make a comeback.
How diplomats helped to lift the ban on Mexican avocados.
Tonight, newly released video shows the moment
heavy rains triggered a deadly mudslide this week
in the Brazilian city of Petropolis.
The death toll is well over 100, and dozens more
are still unaccounted for.
Almost a foot of rain came down in about three hours.
While winds topping 120 miles per hour
howled across Britain today, it turned landing
at London's Heathrow Airport into a nail-biting spectator
sport.
Hundreds of thousands of people watched a live stream
of planes struggling to stay on course
through those dangerous gusts.
Dozens of flights had to be canceled.
And the US embassy today lifted the ban
on inspections of Mexican avocados,
clearing the way for exports to resume.
Deliveries of avocados were temporarily halted last week.
An American inspector was threatened in an area of Mexico
where growers are often shaken down by drug cartels.
The US and Mexico have now agreed
to ensure the safety of inspectors.
Well, On the Road is next with a Florida school
and its very cool visitor.
If you can't watch the CBS Evening News, you can listen.
Subscribe wherever you get your podcasts.
Sponsored by Principal Financial Group.
It's been nearly a half a century
since there was even a chance of snow
in the Tampa, Florida, area.
Well, today, on On the Road has a 100% chance of smiles.
Steve Hartman has the story.
It all started here at Southshore Charter Academy
outside Tampa when teacher Robin Hughes
opened a book about snow--
It's cold.
--and got a frosty reception.
They just had this perplexed look on their face.
Then that's when I asked the question, how many of you
all have never seen snow before?
Hands shot up--
A lot of you.
--in classroom after classroom.
Yeah, I've never seen snow.
I saw it on a TV show.
Like, Ice Age, it has snow.
Like, what is snow, people?
Clearly, Robin had tapped into a desperate yearning
that she wanted to satisfy.
Good.
Unfortunately, it hasn't snowed in Central Florida in 45 years.
Still, Robin wasn't about to let a little thing like meteorology
get in her way.
So she reached out to her sister in Kentucky
and went full out frozen.
She asked me if I want to build a snowman.
Amber Estes begrudgingly agreed to ship her sister
this snowman.
And I said if he makes it to Tampa,
his name is going to be Lucky.
He made it.
Meet Lucky.
I was so excited when I opened the box.
I mean, I could not wait to go in the classroom with them.
So more than a month now, Lucky has been leaving the cafeteria
freezer ever so briefly to grant these poor snow-deprived
children their first ever opportunity--
--make us happy.
--to see, feel, and gush over the mini-miracle
that is a snowman.
It's real snow.
And as a teacher, that's what you want.
You just want that joy.
It's like the first time I ever saw a snowman.
And I was like--
First time I met Lucky, I said he's handsome like a boy.
Yes.
Perhaps no one is more smitten than five-year-old Momo.
I love him.
I knew I would kiss him.
I knew it.
Is that the first boy you've wanted to kiss?
Yes.
And the second boy I'm going to kiss is my dad.
OK, good.
All right.
[LAUGHS]
Bubbling joy, wide-eyed wonder, only a teacher
could take a pile of snow, sticks, and a vegetable
and somehow melt your heart.
Steve Hartman on the road in Riverview, Florida.
I'll never take snow for granted again.
Nice story.
We'll be right back.
Tonight's On the Road segment is sponsored by Geico.
Switch today, and see all the ways you could save.
Sunday on Face the Nation, Margaret's guests
include Secretary of State Antony Blinken, NATO Secretary
General Jens Stoltenberg, and Congressman James Clyburn.
And that's tonight's CBS Evening News.
For Norah O'Donnell and all of us here, I'm Jericka Duncan.
Good night.